[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: One
of my favorite topics
is the nature of the
origin of our cosmos
and the human species.
Toward that end, I've brought
Michael Cremo here today
to give us an entirely
different glimpse
into our extreme
antiquity as a species.
He uses a combination
of conservative,
yet shocking to many,
archaeological research
discoveries, along with
the allegorical history
of the Hindu faith, which
contains some of the most
ancient descriptions
of our origins
of any doctrines in existence.
And it's so good to
see you again, Michael.
And, I mean, "My
Science, My Religion."
This is the stuff
of great debates,
and has been for how long?
I mean, how long have people
have been debating science
versus religion when
it comes to putting
our historical
roots together now?
>>MICHAEL CREMO: For hundreds
of years, even thousands.
As long as you've had the two
things, science and religion,
there's always been debates
about what their relationship
is and how they
overlap or don't.
>>REGINA: Right.
Well that's a very gutsy title
because it just kind of lays it
out right there for everyone.
It's not nuanced, it's in
our faces and it should be.
It seems to me, we've come
to a point where there's
nothing but dead ends and
kind of misinformation
anymore, if we're
sticking totally
with the empirical
scientific process
and trying to discover what
this magnificent species is all
about.
And I don't think anyone's
done more interesting
and work in more
depth than you when
it comes to trying
to reconcile this.
So what I want to
ask you first off is
what was your original kind
of intellectual origins
of your own that even
took you down this road?
>>CREMO: I think it has a lot
to do with how I was raised.
My father was a US Air
Force Intelligence officer,
so that meant a couple of things
for me as I was growing up.
First of all, it
meant I was living
in lots of different places,
and that was important for me.
For example, when I was a little
kid I was living in Hawaii
and I was exposed to
Chinese-Americans,
Japanese-Americans,
Filipino-Americans,
all types of Americans.
Then after that, I
was living in Europe
and one thing this
experience did for me was it
opened my eyes to
the fact there's
more than one way to
look at this world.
I may have a certain way
of looking at the world,
but other people have different
ways of looking at the world.
So when I was living in
Europe when I was a teenager,
I would go on my
school vacations
to different countries.
One place I went was
Stockholm, Sweden,
and I was staying in
a youth hostel there.
And I met some kids who had
traveled overland to India
and back.
Now, these days, it's
very difficult to do that.
In those days, in
the 1960s, you could.
And they told me about
their experiences
in India, seeing the Ganges
River, the Himalayan Mountains,
meeting different kinds
of yogis and mystics
and things like that.
So I became
fascinated with India
and I decided I would
like to go there.
And after that, whenever
I would encounter
some book of Indian
philosophy, I would look at it.
Now I'm not claiming that the
spiritual philosophy of India
is the only one
that has any truth
about these big
cosmological questions.
I think you can find truth
in lots of different places.
But this particular worldview
made a lot of sense to me.
And as you grow
older, you kind of
have to construct
your own worldview,
so I made use of the
worldview of ancient India
to inform my own worldview.
And eventually, I became
a disciple of a guru
from India, Bkaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada.
And under his guidance,
I began an in-depth study
of the ancient Sanskrit
writings of India.
And I noticed there were a lot
of things in those writings
that were quite
different from anything
I had learned in school
from my teachers,
in high school or university.
For example, the historical
writings of ancient India,
the Puranas, describe
human populations
that have existed for
millions of years on Earth
going all the way back
to the very beginnings
of the history of life.
Now in school I'd always learned
that humans appeared fairly
late in the history of life on
Earth, less than 200,000 years
ago, having evolved
from more primitive
ape-like human ancestors.
So there was a big
contradiction there
and I had to decide how I
was going to deal with it.
Now, one thing I could
have done was just
dismissed what I was reading
in the Puranas as mythology
and stick with the
modern scientific account
of human origins and antiquity.
>>REGINA: I was going
to say, isn't that
a common problem, though,
with Western humans?
You go to your church
or synagogue, temple,
and you're given these
allegorical stories.
And the only way you
can contend with it
alongside your
Western education is
you have to dismiss
one or the other.
>>CREMO: Yeah, you're
confronted with a dilemma.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: So I could have
dismissed the accounts
in the Puranas as mythological,
as not really true,
and just accepted the
scientific evidence
I read about in my
textbooks as true.
Or I could've just
decided, well, I'm
going to have faith in
what the Puranas say
and I don't care what the
scientific evidence says.
But I decided to take
another approach,
and that was to
really look carefully
at the scientific evidence
and, at the same time,
accept what the Puranas were
saying as possibly true.
And that led me into
eight years of research
into the whole
history of archaeology
because I want to
see are there perhaps
any archaeological
discoveries that
are consistent with the accounts
of extreme human antiquity
that I found in the Puranas.
Now, the first place I looked
was in the current textbooks.
And in the textbooks, I
didn't see any such evidence.
But I thought, let me
look beyond the textbooks,
let me look into the original
scientific reports published--
>>REGINA: How did you
decide to do that?
I mean, you had to go to some
rather obscure documents.
At least documents that have
been obscured historically.
>>CREMO: Well, I
think, again, this
has something to do
with how I was raised.
As I was explaining
earlier, my father
was an intelligence officer in
the United States Air Force.
I grew up among people in
the intelligence service,
in the CIA, in the
diplomatic service.
And one thing I learned
as I was growing up
is there is such a thing
as hidden knowledge.
There are certain
facts about the world
that most people
are not aware of.
So I thought,
well, maybe there's
some archaeological
facts that aren't
getting through to people.
And that is what
influenced me to dig deeper
than the textbooks, to go back
to the original scientific
reports published by
archaeologists, geologists,
and other earth scientists.
Not just from the
more recent years,
but from the time of Darwin
in the mid 19th century all
the way up to the present.
And I also looked not just
in reports in English.
Because of my education,
I have a reading knowledge
of German, French,
Italian, Spanish,
and a lot of other
European languages.
>>REGINA: How admirable.
>>CREMO: So I
decided let me look.
And I didn't know
what I would find.
I was thinking
originally maybe I'll
do eight weeks of research,
I'll find one or two
interesting facts.
I'll write a short
article about it,
and then I'll move
on to something else
because there's
lots of questions.
Human origins is just one
question about the world
that we live.
But when I started
that research,
I happened upon one case after
another where archaeologists,
geologists and
paleontologists were reporting
finding human bones, human
artifacts, human footprints
millions of years
old, and this was
in the professional
scientific literature.
>>REGINA: How did you even
locate that literature?
I mean, what was
that process like?
You don't need to
belabor it, but I'm
wondering that
couldn't have just
been readily
available by Googling.
>>CREMO: No, it wasn't at
that time when I started this
research in 1984--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: -something you
could come upon by Googling.
The worldwide web didn't
exist at that time.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
How did you go about this?
>>CREMO: So I had a
research assistant
who was helping
me in my research,
and I just had a
suspicion that if we
started looking--
it was just a hunch.
You could say it was intuition.
I just had some intuition
that if we started digging
into the old documents, the
old scientific literatures--
I was particularly interested
in the literature that
dated to the time period
immediately after Darwin
published his book
"The Origin of Species"
where he was first proposing
ideas that led to the concept
that human beings
like us evolved
from primitive ape-like
ancestors fairly recently.
So I thought during
that time period,
scientists must have been
going out and looking
for evidence of missing links--
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>CREMO: -connecting
humans like us
with more primitive
ape-like human ancestors.
In other words, I
thought, well, they
must have been
looking for ape men
of various kinds in
the fossil record.
So I wanted to look at
that period in detail,
so I had my research
assistant get reports
from the 1860s, the
1870s, the 1880s.
And I was really
surprised to find
that these scientists, they
were looking for evidence
of a missing link, but
they weren't finding it.
They were finding
evidence that humans
like us were existing
millions of years ago.
Now, those reports are no
longer in the textbooks.
>>REGINA: Right.
Were they ever?
I mean, were they pub-- they
obviously were published
or you wouldn't have
been able to find them.
>>CREMO: They were published
in the professional scientific
literature in the
1860s, 1870s, 1880s.
There was a key event that
took place in the 1890s.
That was the first time
that scientists actually
discovered a fossil
of something that you
could call an ape man
or a missing link.
There was a Dutch researcher
named Eugene Dubois.
He had gone to Indonesia and
he was doing some excavations
there and he found
in his trenches
at a place called Trinil in
the country of-- on the island
of Java, he found an ape-like
skull and a human-like leg bone
and he put them
together and said
this is the Java ape man,
Pithecanthropus erectus.
And that was the first
evidence they really
found of a missing link.
>>REGINA: But you just said an
ape-like skull and a human leg.
I mean is that what
later was determined,
or were these found
apart from each other
or within the same area?
>>CREMO: Well, they were
found at the same site,
but they were found about
45 feet from each other.
And I think what he
found was evidence
that humans like
us were coexisting
with ape men over 800,000
years ago in Java.
And, you know, the
reason I say that is
that scientists in the 1970s
carefully studied the thigh
bone or femur that Dubois
had found at the Trinil site
in Java, and they
had determined it
was identical to a
modern human femur
in every aspect of its anatomy.
And it was completely different
from any type of ape man femur
or thigh bone that had been
found subsequent to that.
But in the 19th century, Dubois
put the two together and said--
>>REGINA: Here's
you're missing link.
>>CREMO: -here's
the Java Ape Man.
So that was a key event in
the history of archaeology.
So--
>>REGINA: And was
that taken seriously
by the international
archaeological community?
>>CREMO: It was after
some time of controversy,
it was taken seriously.
So then they had to
decide what to do
with all the evidence that
had previously been reported
in the scientific publications
about human bones,
human footprints, and human
artifacts that had been found
in layers of rock
millions of years old.
You know, if you have
your ape man missing
link at 800,000 years, or maybe
as much as a million years,
then modern humans
would have to have
come into existence
sometime after that.
So that's when, I think, a
process of knowledge filtration
began in the world
of science where
they began eliminating all of
these other previous reports
from scientific discussion
about human origins.
And then after that period of
time, in the late 19th century
and early 20th century, whenever
any scientist would find
evidence for a human presence
going back further than
would be expected,
it would either
be reinterpreted or
dismissed or explained away
in a very unfair way.
>>REGINA: What I
don't understand
is why that one particular
event, the Java finding,
had so much more traction than
all of this other evidence.
Was it more political
in that Darwinism
was starting to take
roots philosophically
and within the educational
system, or why?
>>CREMO: Well, I think
it was part of a process,
as you're indicating, a more
cultural and political process
whereby the leading
intellectuals in the world
were searching for ways
to explain human origins
in a purely materialistic way.
And I think this discovery
served those interests.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
Gotcha.
So the other evidence was put
away in vaults and libraries,
I take it?
>>CREMO: Yeah.
And if you're not
aware of this evidence,
it's very difficult
to track down.
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>CREMO: It's one reason I
put it all together in a book
called "Forbidden Archeology-"
>>REGINA: It's amazing,
900 plus pages.
Amazing book.
>>CREMO: -to make this
evidence accessible to people,
so that they have a complete
set of facts with which
to make their judgments about
human origins and antiquity.
If you look in the
current textbooks,
you only see the
facts that support
the current dominant
evolutionary ideas
about human origins.
>>REGINA: Right.
As you say in your book, a
Judeo Christian timeline.
>>CREMO: Well, I think that also
has something to do with it.
That modern science grew up
against a Judeo Christian
cultural background, and
that cultural background
has a linear
progressive time concept
where if you look at it,
there is a beginning creation,
there's a fall, there's
a deliverance, and then
a last judgment.
It all happens just once.
But many other cultures have
a cyclical concept of time.
>>REGINA: If you
would, explain that.
I think this would
be a good time.
You've started entering
the subject of the evidence
itself a moment ago.
Now let's go back to the earlier
part of the conversation,
and if you could explain
to us who don't understand
the Vedic texts and the Puranas,
what that timeline looked like,
the cyclical nature of
that history looks like.
Enough that it intrigued you
to even begin this research.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
Well, we all have to
deal with time cycles.
I mean one cycle
of time that we all
have to deal with is
the day-night cycle.
During the day, we're
active for most of us.
During the night we're
sleeping or dreaming.
There's also a seasonal cycle
in the temperate climates
of the world.
You go through spring,
summer, fall, winter
and you adjust your
consciousness and behavior
according to what part of
the seasonal cycle you're in.
Many of the ancient people were
aware of even larger cycles
of time.
The Mayan people had a
cyclical concept of time.
The ancient Greeks and Romans
had a cyclical concept of time.
>>REGINA: Egyptians.
>>CREMO: The Egyptians.
And the people of
ancient India also
had a cyclical concept of
time, and the basic unit
of that cyclical
concept of time was
called the kalpa, or
the day of Brahma.
And it lasts about four
billion 320 million years.
It's followed by
a night of Brahma,
which also last for four
billion 320 million years.
>>REGINA: So we're looking
at a total of about nine
billion years, and
how many cycles
are recognized or acknowledged?
>>CREMO: Well,
the cycle goes on.
It repeats time after
time after time.
After a night of Brahma,
there's another day of Brahma.
And according to
the Vedic cosmology,
during the days of Brahma,
life, including human life,
is manifest in the cosmos.
And during the night of Brahma,
it's dormant, or unmanifest.
So according to the Vedic
cosmological calendar,
we're now about halfway
through the current kalpa,
or day of Brahma.
And that means a
Vedic archaeologist
would expect to find evidence
for a human presence going back
to the beginning
of the kalpa, which
would be about 2
billion years ago.
As I said, the whole kalpa
is about four billion
320 million years.
We're halfway through it.
That means it began a little
over 2 billion years ago.
>>REGINA: So that would be the
daytime kalpa in which things
are nourished and
flourish and life grows.
>>CREMO: Including human life.
>>REGINA: Including human life.
So what does the nighttime
kalpa represent then?
>>CREMO: That
represents a time when
the lifeforms are all
in a dormant state.
>>REGINA: Does this
follow catastrophe?
Is that often the
bridge between the two?
>>CREMO: Yes.
According to the
Vedic cosmology,
there are periodic catastrophes
that influence life on Earth;
however, the information
that allows the whole system
to boot up again is still
there on some higher level.
A lot of people today
are interested in what
they call cloud computing.
That means they keep
their files and programs
on the cloud-- in the
cloud as they put it,
which means even if you lose
the content on your device,
it's still there so
that you can access it.
So the information
and intelligence
that's required to start up life
again on this level of reality
is always there on this
higher level of reality.
And there are intelligences
there who can do that.
They can boot up
the system again.
>>REGINA: And would
this also account
for the conversations around
the existence of Atlantis
and Lemuria and other
ancient cultures, which
have disappeared
from the map, as it
were, due to
cataclysm or whatnot?
>>CREMO: Yes.
There are many
accounts of cataclysms.
And within the Vedic
cosmology, there
are cycles within
cycles within cycles.
I had mentioned to you the
major time cycle called
the kalpa, which lasts for
four billion 320 million years.
Within the kalpa, there
are further cycles--
>>REGINA: The yuga cycles.
>>CREMO: -called
manvantaras and yugas.
For example, within
the kalpa, there
are 14 manvantara periods,
each lasting about 300 million
years.
And after each manvantara,
there is a devastation.
And the manvantaras are
made up of yuga cycles,
and there can also be
devastations there.
So many cultures have
the idea that there
are-- there have existed cities
with a high level of culture
and civilization that have
now gone under the water.
Atlantis is one of them.
Lemuria is another.
In India, there's the story
of the city of Dwarka,
which was the city
of Lord Krishna.
It was a beautiful city with
a very high level of culture
and civilization that
went under the water
about 5,000 years ago.
>>REGINA: Where was it located?
>>CREMO: It was located
in Northwestern India.
There's still a
city named Dwarka
in Northwestern India in
the Gujarat state now,
but it's interesting.
Archaeologists have done
dives off the coast of Dwarka,
the present city
of Dwarka, which
has the same name
as the ancient city.
And offshore under
the water, they
have found the remains
of an ancient city.
It would be like finding
the remains of Atlantis,
for example.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Fascinating.
OK, now let's go back then
to the more modern times
and let's talk about Darwin
and his partner Alfred Russel
Wendell?
>>CREMO: Wallace.
>>REGINA: Wallace.
Wallace.
>>CREMO: Alfred Russel Wallace.
>>REGINA: And Wallace
and Darwin were not
exactly on the same page
once all of the dust settled.
Wallace had a different
viewpoint than Darwin.
>>CREMO: Yes.
Well, it's interesting
what happened.
They had a very
interesting relationship.
Darwin had gone on
this expedition where
he sailed around the world
to the Galapagos Islands
and places like that,
and that's where he first
got this idea of evolution.
So he went back to England
and he began writing a book,
but it took him about 20 years.
After 20 years, he still had
not published his theory.
And he was sitting in England
and one day he got a letter
from Wallace, another
scientist, a younger scientist,
in which he found
a paper outlining
the theory of evolution
by natural selection.
And Wallace said he
was going to present it
at a meeting of a scientific
society in England
and get it published.
And Darwin, at that
time, was just shocked.
He'd been working on this theory
of evolution for 20 years.
And the way it works
in the scientific world
is that the first person
who publishes the theory
gets their name on it.
So Darwin called all of his
scientific friends together
and told them what had happened.
And they said, well, there's
only one thing you could really
do is you could ask Wallace
if along with his paper
a paper by you, Darwin,
could also be presented
at the same meeting of
this scientific society.
It was called the Linnean
Society in England.
And that way, you could both
publish at the same time
and then you would be the
joint authors of the theory.
And for a long time, the theory
was called the Wallace Darwin
Theory of Evolution.
But now, it's just
called the Darwin theory.
>>REGINA: How did
Wallace get axed?
>>CREMO: Well, he
was a scientist,
but he was a very
open-minded scientist.
Now Darwin was pretty strictly
materialist in his outlook,
so he wanted to
explain everything
in terms of ordinary
matter operating
according to purely
materialistic scientific laws
of physics and chemistry.
Now Wallace, in his
scientific research,
could see that there
is more to this world,
there's more to living things
that just ordinary matter,
the chemical elements.
He could see that there were
subtle elements involved,
that there was some kind
of guiding intelligence.
This is another thing that
separated him from Darwin.
>>REGINA: Wasn't he into
psychic type of research--
>>CREMO: Yes.
>>REGINA: -in the day, so he
was really trying to test it.
>>CREMO: Yes, he was.
And he worked with another
English scientist, Sir William
Crookes, who was later
a president of the Royal
Society, England's top most
scientific organization.
And together, they were doing
experiments with mediums.
There was a medium named
Daniel Dunglass Home,
and this man had
psychokinetic abilities,
mind over matter abilities.
And they did
experiments with him
in which they verified these
psychokinetic abilities,
and they published
their results.
Now, when that happened,
Darwin told Wallace,
I think you're killing our
child, the Theory of Evolution,
by getting into these
paranormal topics.
So they had a kind of
intellectual divorce.
And I think of the two,
Wallace was actually
the better scientist.
Darwin, I think, was
objecting to these things
because he wanted to have a
science that was based strictly
on matter and material laws
with no intelligence involved.
Whereas Wallace was prepared
to have a science that
included not just
the ordinary material
elements, but subtle
material elements,
mental and intellectual
energies, and the energy
of the consciousness, which
is purely non-material.
And he was prepared
to accept that there
were various levels of conscious
entities in the cosmos,
and that conscious entities on
the higher levels of the cosmos
had influence on
the history of life.
And these were things that
Darwin just could not accept.
Now, I think of the two, Wallace
was the better scientist.
>>REGINA: One of the lines in
your book, it said in the end,
he believed that the will
of higher intelligence
formed the universe.
It was a very simple statement
I underlined out of your book.
That was essentially
what he came to--
>>CREMO: Yes.
>>REGINA: -through the
mechanisms you just
mentioned a bit
ago, complex systems
that have time to foment,
guided by intelligence.
>>CREMO: And these are
debates that still go on today
in the world of science.
>>REGINA: I interviewed a
man named Bernard Haisch, who
wrote "The God Theory."
And basically, he's in
the world of physics
and coming to a
very similar place
in his community of physicists.
>>CREMO: Yeah, but it's very
much against the mainstream
ideas.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: Now, some
people-- in one sense,
it's just a question of
treating science as a game.
And one of the rules in the
game as it's played today
is you can't introduce
non-material substances
beyond the chemical elements.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: Another rule is
that you can't introduce
conscious agency in
your explanations of how
things come into being.
So those are two rules.
But my position is that science
should deal with everything
that's possibly true about
the world that we live in.
And I think both
of these things,
non-material substances
and intelligent agency,
are two things that are
possibly true about the world
that we live in.
And if we're going to have a
complete scientific description
of reality, we
shouldn't artificially
exclude these things.
And it's one reason
I admire Wallace.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: Because he had
the courage as a scientist
to introduce
non-material substance
and intelligent agency into
his scientific worldview.
In other words, he
was bringing together
his science and his religion,
or spiritual commitments, which
I think is a really
good example.
So--
>>REGINA: Well, and it creates
a bridge between the two
so people don't have to
live in this perpetual state
of conflict.
Right?
>>CREMO: Right.
>>REGINA: I mean, you
have a spiritual life,
which is nonsensical in
the world of science.
And yet, I don't know if
it's most people any longer,
but a very large percentage
of the population
is fully committed to
both of those belief
systems, the science
and their religion,
and that really
starts breaking down
a coherence inside the
person's own intellect.
>>CREMO: Yeah, I
mean, I've personally
made a decision where
I put the two together.
And--
>>REGINA: But you
did the hard work.
You did the research so that you
could even justify doing that.
Not only justify it,
you could prove it out
in the scientific arena,
create that bridge for others
to do the same.
And compiling that in
your book was amazing,
in "Forbidden Archeology."
Just an amazing job
of what you did.
It's highly detailed.
You're not just
putting forth a theory.
All the evidence, all the
debates in the day and so
forth are all present
for a person to evaluate.
That's the heavy
lifting in this way.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Most people don't
have the means to do that.
>>CREMO: You know, when
I started that research,
I didn't know that I would be
able to find any such evidence.
Now, I think when we're talking
about science and religion,
it's important to remember that
for people who are strictly
religious, evidence
from their sacred text
is authoritative for them.
So in the world of science, a
statement from a sacred text,
be it the Bible or the
Koran or a Vedic text,
is not going to be
taken as authoritative.
But here's what I propose doing.
You can take an idea
from a sacred text
and turn it into a hypothesis
and make a prediction from it,
and then look and
see whether there
is any evidence from the
scientific point of view
that confirms or
denies your hypothesis.
For example, in my
"Forbidden Archaeology" work,
here's what I did.
In the Puranas, the historical
texts of ancient India,
there are statements about
extreme human antiquity,
humans existing
millions of years ago.
So in terms of my
dealings with science,
I could not go to a meeting
of the World Archaeological
Congress and just present a
statement from the Puranas.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: Now if I was in India
in the Himalayan mountains just
speaking with a
bunch of Vedic sages
who accept the statements
of the Puranas as evidence,
I could do that.
But if I go to a meeting
of archaeologists
in the Western world, they're
not going to accept that.
So what I do is I put it
in terms of a hypothesis.
If the statements of
the Puranas are true,
then there should be reports of
archaeological evidence showing
that humans existed
millions of years ago.
So that's a prediction
that can be tested.
And I explain my
methodology; well,
let me look at all
the scientific reports
and see if there
are any that are
consistent with what
the Puranas say.
Now if there are none,
then I don't have anything
to say in scientific circles.
If there are such reports,
and I found there were,
there were many, enough to
fill up a 900 page book,
then I do have something to
say in scientific circles.
And in this latest book of
mine, "My Science, My Religion,"
I have 24 papers
that I presented--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: -at major international
scientific conferences.
So--
>>REGINA: You were
presenting to your peers.
OK, and you were mentioning a
bit ago that the Puranas talk
about the ancient
antiquity of our species,
but also, as I recall
in reading through here,
the existence of monkey-like
or ape-like beings
who existed also into extreme
antiquity alongside humans.
They existed simultaneously.
>>CREMO: Yes.
The Puranas and other historical
writings of ancient India
speak of creatures
called Vanaras.
That means forest dwellers.
And if you look at the
descriptions of them,
you'll see they
have ape-like bodies
but human-like intelligence.
They have the ability to speak.
They have a simple
level of culture
and-- now this takes
us into another area,
they also have mystic powers.
Now--
>>REGINA: Graham Hancock
writes about this a bit
in his work of
fiction, "Entangled."
He speaks about this.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
I know Graham.
He's another figure in the
alternative history field.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
Well, and then
also, you're looking
at-- now you're looking
at coming into modern lore
with this even
taking it forward,
creatures such as
Bigfoot or Sasquatch
that have managed to
somehow throughout eons
remain isolated enough
to survive, right?
This is part of it?
>>CREMO: Yes.
I think just as today
we are coexisting
with apes and monkeys, and
with various kinds of ape men
on this planet; in the past,
we also coexisted with them.
So the picture that you get if
you look at all the evidence
is not one of evolution of
one form from the other,
but one of coexistence
of different types
of human and ape-like
and ape beings.
>>REGINA: And in pop literature,
this was captured by the series
"Clan of the Cave Bears."
That was an attempt to
put modern anatomically--
Daryl Hannah played the
part in the film years ago,
modern humans alongside
cave dwellers of the day.
So maybe she was tapping into
something on an intuitive level
in writing this series of books.
>>CREMO: Yes.
And I think science
is step-by-step slowly
coming around to
that point of view.
When I published "Forbidden
Archeology" in 1993,
most scientists did
not believe that humans
like us coexisted
with ancestral types,
according to their
point of view.
But today, most
archaeologists do
believe that at a
certain point in time,
that humans like us coexisted
with other ape-like human-like
beings.
So they're kind of coming--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And this would indicate too
there is no missing link.
We talked about this
early in the interview.
There is no missing link.
But when I talked to you last,
which was a few years ago,
I think it was before
this book came out,
we discussed that
there is a larger
agenda to Darwin's
Theory of Evolution.
And I was very interested in
what you had to say about that
and have shared that
with other people.
And I would like to hear that
again, if you wouldn't mind,
we can wrap this interview
up with that understanding
from your perspective.
>>CREMO: Well, these
questions, who am I
and where did I come
from, are very important.
We form our goals and our
values based on our answers
to these fundamental questions.
For example, if I think
I'm an American man,
then that's how I behave because
that's my sense of identity.
And from that sense
of identity flow
my values and my goals
and my ambitions.
So for the past century
or so, the supporters
of the Darwinian
Theory of Evolution,
through the monopoly they
have in the education
systems in most
countries in the world,
have had the power
to dictate to people
the answers to those
fundamental questions who am I
and where did I come from?
And the answers
that they are giving
to these fundamental questions
are quite materialistic.
They're basically saying,
well, we're just evolved apes.
We are machines made of
matter in competition
with each other for survival.
And as far as any other
ideas are concerned,
they're excluded from
the education system.
So these are the
dominant ideas that
are being promoted
all over the world
by the supporters of the
Darwinian Theory of Evolution.
Now because the
answers they're giving
to these fundamental
questions, who am I
and where did I come from, are
so thoroughly materialistic,
it's no surprise to me that
our whole worldwide human
civilization has
become influenced
in a very materialistic way.
Most people believe that
to produce and consume
more and more material things is
the main purpose of human life.
And this has some
effects on human society.
One effect that it has
is on the environment.
Because of this process
of overproduction
and over-consumption
of material things,
we're poisoning the
air, poisoning the land,
poisoning the water, consuming
the Earth's resources
in an unsustainable way,
driving all kinds of species
of plants and animals
into extinction.
So that is one effect.
Another effect of these
ideas is we see conflict
on all levels of human society.
If we're told we're machines
made of matter in competition
with each other for
survival, then we
divide ourselves into competing
groups of nations, classes,
religions, whatever.
And we compete with each other
for the control of material
resources in one
fashion or another.
So--
>>REGINA: But then you
go to church on Sunday
and you're told
that that is bad.
I mean, look at the
conflicting messages
that you should be, in the
Judeo Christian way, selfless.
I mean, really,
it's quite a schism.
>>CREMO: Well, it depends.
You know, the one
thing that I believe
comes from this Darwinian
idea of competing
with each other for
survival is the division
into religious groups competing
with each other for survival.
Now, I know that's
not the only cause,
but I think this is
something that contributes--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: -to this.
>>REGINA: So it's
still fundamental,
even to the way those
religions operate and function.
>>CREMO: Well, we see that
in the previous century,
the 20th century, the big
conflicts in the world
were driven by competing
ideological systems
like communism and
capitalism and fascism.
In the 21st century,
it appears that one
of the elements of
conflict is competing
religious views of the world.
And I think there is a
higher religious vision that
recognizes the unity
of all living things
and does not support
this division of humans
into competing--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: -groups even on
the basis of religion.
And I think there is a
higher type of religion
that stresses
non-material values.
Now, in many cases, religion is
promoting materialistic values,
as I mentioned.
Say if you define in
scientific terms or identity
in purely materialistic
terms, you'll
think that to produce and
consume more and more material
things is the main
purpose of human life.
Well, for some people,
religion means praying to God,
please help me produce and
consume more and more--
>>REGINA: That's true.
That is true.
>>CREMO: -materal things.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: So I think
there's a higher religion,
a true spirituality that kind
of goes beyond all of that.
And I would say part of the
power of the Darwinian Theory
of Evolution is the compromises
that many of the world's
religions have made with it.
>>REGINA: That's an
interesting story in itself.
>>CREMO: Which gives it a
certain amount of social power
that I think eventually
needs to be broken.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And it seems that another effect
of believing that we descend
in a materialistic
view from an ape,
and lower life
forms before that,
is it also keeps us from
looking at the dual nature
of our being and
our true potential.
I mean, we have this vast field
of interconnected intelligence.
If you believe that
you're essentially
an ape, dust to
dust-- an evolved--
an evolution from an
ape, dust-to-dust,
why would you even
begin that search
for this more refined
aspect of being
that survives the physical?
You wouldn't, right?
>>CREMO: Yes, but--
yeah, you could
have a conception of apes
that involved understanding
that they also have a
non-material conscious self.
>>REGINA: That's true and
it goes a step further.
>>CREMO: And that through
the process of reincarnation
the soul that's now
in the body of an ape
could eventually come
to that of a human form.
So I think the
real problem is not
understanding that life
is more than a combination
of molecules, of
material elements.
Whether we're talking about
plants, animals, apes,
ape men, or human
beings, a living thing
is more than a
combination of chemicals.
We're not just machines
made of matter.
We have a subtle
mind element that
has some very unusual powers.
There is a conscious self
that is totally non-material.
I look at bodies as vehicles
for conscious selves.
That's what we really are.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: And this is something
that I explored in depth
in my book "Human Devolution--"
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: -where I propose,
well, as conscious beings,
we did not evolve
up from matter.
Rather we have
devolved, or come down,
from the level of
pure consciousness.
Matter does not
produce consciousness,
but consciousness can become
associated with matter.
And we're now in that condition,
where our consciousness has
become associated with matter.
And, to me, this indicates that
the real purpose of human life
is to restore consciousness
to its original pure state.
Which means we should try
to satisfy our material
needs in the most simple,
natural, and efficient way
possible while putting
most of our human energy
into developing that
resource of consciousness.
And I think this is--
>>REGINA: I think you're right.
>>CREMO: -something we've gotten
away from in our current--
>>REGINA: That's the only thing
that's going to put balance--
>>CREMO: -situation.
>>REGINA: -back into all
of it because how can you
respect other life
forms and the Earth
itself if you don't have
the consciousness to do so?
And expanded awareness,
especially if you're
into a material
paradigm of consumption
so that the machine can
keep perpetuating itself.
>>CREMO: I think
if I understand I'm
a being of pure consciousness,
all others are beings
of pure consciousness,
that we develop
a real respect for life.
We don't divide ourselves
into competing groups
and cause so much conflict
and destruction in the world.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
I have just one quick question,
and this is now a total non
sequitur and it's a
question, why Vishnu here
is depicted as blue.
Sometimes Krishna
Why are they depicted as blue?
>>CREMO: That is an
image of Mahavishnu.
And according to the
ancient Sanskrit texts,
that color blue is his color.
It represents pure intelligence.
>>REGINA: OK.
I knew it was
symbolic, but I never
asked anybody that
had that answer.
So thank you for sharing that.
And we have much
more to discuss.
So Michael and I are going
to continue this conversation
by discussing the evidence
that has been unearthed
that lines up with
the Purana texts.
These show that Homo sapiens
are hundreds of millions
of years old.
Also that we've been all but
wiped out on repeated occasions
throughout history.
You won't want to miss
the rest of the story.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]